Uploading to the Arduino

1. Download the Arduino IDE from the arduino.cc website (1.8.19 recommended). 
2. If using a Nano Every, the board will need to be added via the Boards Manager. Skip to step 3 otherwise
	- Select Tools>Board: >Boards Manager...
	- Search Nano Every or megaAVR
	- Install the board to the IDE
3. Open the "BreathingSensorNanoEveryWithTrigger.ino" file or "BreathingSensorWithTrigger.ino" file (for Uno, Nano, and Micro)
4. Select the appropriate port with the Arduino connected via USB under Tools>Port. Be sure that the selected Board is correct for the model
5. Upload the program to the board



Installing the .exe file

Download the BreathingSensorWithTrigger_web.exe onto a computer running Windows 10 or newer. Run the installation. The program will need to download the runtime package from Matlab. Once finished, connect the Arduino and verify that the board is detected by the program and that the program receives data from the microcontroller.

** FOR REFERENCE FOR ASSEMBLY, SETTING THE NOTCH FILTER, AND CONNECTING THE ARDUINO, SEE "BreathingSensorAssembly.png" **

Assembling the board

The .zip file contains the GERBER files for PCB construction. Prototyping board companies such as PCBway and JLCPCB offer low-cost production. All of the component values and IC names should be included in the silkscreen. Solder the components in, beginning with the capacitors and resistors, leaving room for the IC sockets. Move from the inside of the board out to more easily place the resistors and capacitors. The BNC connectors should be soldered to the bottom side of the board as indicated by the silkscreen. These have been moved below the board to allow the enclosure to completely close while allowing access to the potentiometers and switch. For placing the LED, keep the LED elevated 6-8mm above the board so that it can be seen when flashing. If there are flat notches in the legs of the LED, use these as a guide to set the height.

Once assembled, verify connections are good by taking measurements across components or by testing continuity of IC socket pins and connections further along the copper traces.



Calibrating the notch filter

Calibration will require a signal generator and oscilloscope. Remove all sources of power and remove the IC closest to the 3 trimmers from its socket. Orient the board so that the SPST switch is furthest away and the BNC connectors are to the left. Place the output probe of the signal generator into pin 1 (top left with notch upward) of the exposed IC socket. Place the input probe of the oscilloscope to pin 5 of the exposed IC socket (bottom right with notch upward). Connect both ground probes from the signal generator and oscilloscope to the pin 4 (bottom left with notch upward) of the socket, or through the GND pin of the screw terminal block. 
Set the signal generator to output a sine wave at 1V at 50 or 60Hz (depending on country AC frequency) with no DC offset. Be sure the sine wave is visible on the oscilloscope. Begin by adjusting the bottom left trimmer (1) until the signal reaches a local minimum (will increase in either direction). Switch to adjusting the top (2) and bottom right (3) trimmers to further shrink the signal. Alternate between (2) and (3) while ensuring the shape of the waveform remains sinusoidal without additional harmonics introduced. Return to (1) and iteratively adjust the trimmers until the signal is within the noise floor of the oscilloscope. The signal may remain sinusoidal but not accurately measureable (<20mV, typical).



Soldering wire connections to the Arduino

4 wires will need to be soldered to teh pins of the Arduino. Soldering to the top of the board and slightly to the side is recommended and will allow for the Arduino to sit flat in the printed housing. With the USB port positioned to the right, solder wires to the top GND pin, 5V pin, A7 and A0 with 4-5cm of wire. All connections will be on the same side.



Device Assembly

Connect the wires from the Arduino to the screw terminal block as indicated. Place the Arduino board into the makeshift socket. Place the finished PCB into the housing and secure using 4-40 screws (or rethreading with M3). Some adjustment may be needed to get the 2-pin connector through the gap in the side wall. The lid should fit easily on top around the switch, potentiometers and LED and should come off on its own.



Assembling the sensor

Solder stranded wire (AWG22 or thinner) to the buzzer element. The positive wire should be soldered to the center disk, taking care not to melt the material. Light contact and a pre-tinned wire should be used to minimize risk of damage. The negative wire should be soldered to the outer gold disk. When holding the disk with helping hands, or other assistive tools, be careful not to place exposed contacts across the two disks as the heat can cause a voltage spike to arc through. Flatten down any sharp or protruding bumps with the iron.
Wire should be long enough to reach the animal with the board near the user for adjustments (1.5-2m). Cut the female header wire assmebly and solder to the wires connected to the piezo. The wires should be arranged so that the positive wire goes to the positive indicator on the board.
Once the piezo is soldered, electrical tape, or other insulating material can cover the piezo and wires to reduce risk of shorting the sensor and protect the animal from residual solder protrusions.



Testing the system

Connect the assembled sensor to the 2-pin connector on the side wall. Power the Arduino via USB to a computer or wall outlet. With an oscilloscope, connect to the top BNC (BNC trio facing left) and press lightly on the sensor to look for oscillations. Adjust the right potentiometer to verify that the signal amplitude changes. Flip the switch to the left and tap while adjusting the left potentiometer. Verify that the LED flickers. Change the oscilloscope probe to the middle BNC connector and verify that TTL pulses are recorded.
Open the BreathingSensor program on the computer. Click Start to being receiving data from the microcontroller. Lightly tap the piezo to see fluctuations in the received data. Click Stop and change the settings to output a trigger during recording, every N pulses, or toggle every N pulses. Connect the oscilloscope to the bottom BNC port. Click Start and verify that the signal changes by the trigger type behavior selected.
